<!--//meta
About: The isolating effects of mental illness on families and the social stigma surrounding it.
Description: A personal narrative exploring the challenges of mental illness, its impact on relationships, and the importance of empathy and inclusion in overcoming isolation.
Primary Keyword: mental illness isolation
Related Keywords: mental health stigma, family mental health, social withdrawal, support groups
Long-Tail Keywords: coping with mental illness as a family, overcoming stigma in mental health, mental illness and social relationships
Date: 30 Sep 2024
Date_mr: 2024-09-30
Authored By: `Fem`
Published: `Imran` on 6 Jun 2025
Meta Author: `GitHub Copilot`
//meta-->

**Benumbing Isolation of Mental Illness**

" I don't talk to my friends that much mom," remarked my elder son
wearily. "Do you miss it?" I asked. " Yes, a lot", he said in a very
subdued and depressed tone. My heart ached to caress him across the
Atlantic ten thousand miles away.


We used to be an ordinary happy family, where we enjoyed all the
occasions such as birthdays, anniversaries, Diwalies, Thanksgivings and
Christmases, and New Years. We socialized in various capacities and
celebrated and rejoiced with friends, family and colleagues. Each of us
in the family had his/her own friend circle and also we had close family
friends with whom we hung out through thick and thin or so it seemed...


Among all of us, my elder son, Ramesh, was the most gregarious and
vivacious. At six, he had friends ranging from two to twelve years. He
seamlessly fit into any group and gave his best emotionally to everyone.
Pravatt, on the other hand, had few but very close friends whom he hung
on to tightly. He too had a very good rapport with his classmates, which
I discovered when his third grade class gave him a farewell, while
moving cities.


My husband Ashutosh, has had very close few friends with mutual respect
and love who have stood by him.


I for one, have had very close friends and relationships with family
which I have picked up along every walk of my life, be it school,
college, work, meditation sojourns or a psyche rehab center. I have
cherished these a lot. I have embellished in each of these friendships,
celebrated, partied, and grown with each person.


However, over the past few years things have changed dramatically in our
family's lives. The mental illness which has enveloped the family like a
dark night, has scattered and shattered each one in many many ways.


Slowly, the friends have dwindled to a few brave souls who have stood by
through the years, for which I am eternally grateful. A lot of the old
friends don't know what to say, because most people want to be
associated with normalcy and a daily regular life, and not gloom and
doom. 'You have too many issues which tends to be depressing', they seem
to imply. No one wants to listen to depressing things. I feel
embarrassed and apologetic to take up people's time for my issues, when
they are otherwise going about their business of a routine day. Others
also feel the same way. You see this has slowly made us isolate
ourselves. There is an unspoken hint, that that's what therapists are
for, you pay them to listen to your issues.


The other very important embarrassment is the disability associated with
mental illness. The inability to be productive like before, makes one
want to hang one's head in shame. How can I explain how deep the lack of
confidence is, and from whence it arises? This is the biggest question
which has made me vary of socialization: "what are you doing now?" How
can I explain the lethargy and brain fog which plagues me everyday, with
my brain bathed with psychoactive drugs? How can I explain the inability
to carry on all the intellectual pursuits and not so intellectual tasks,
which I could perform so easily in the past?


Since a lot of my friends know that I only volunteer and work
occasionally, their next best question is to ask me about my
contribution as a mother. "What are your sons doing?" Since it is normal
among the so called normal people to have educated and married off their
children by this time. However, that's not the path my children are
taking. Academic success in its classic form appears to be eluding them.


Oft-times there is a pity which is absolutely unthinkable and
unbearable. I would rather die than face that pity, as everyday we try
to live with our head held high, despite all the adversities, and there
is no scope for that kind of lip-sympathy. Therefore it is better to
stay away from it all, than be exposed to that kind of pain.


Thus it appears like we as a family are failures at multiple levels and
thus it is easier to isolate ourselves and for our friends to leave us
alone rather than reach out to us. However, its my bid to change this
foreboding of mental illness. As a teenager, I dreamt of becoming an
astronaut, as I gazed at the stars shining above from the window next to
me. I am nowhere near that dream, yet I know my life will help change
something in the mental health sphere.


Depression afflicts one in ten youth in the world, and is one of the
greatest causes of disability among the millennials. These statistics
give some relief that you're not alone. But to not be alone, in day to
day life you need to stand with other people who face the same problems.
You need to be in support groups. These support groups are available for
individuals, but you need to go as a family and socialize, like the old
times, except with different set of people. This is really a big
challenge! Support groups otherwise are artificial. Although through a
couple of 'meet ups' I have attended, I've found that people are
remarkably open and honest about their lives. But there is a woeful lack
of 'so called normal talk'. Thus there is no happy balance with this
situation.


Instead, with friends and family who know your life, it is easier to be
normal as well as allow the space for an honest and open dialogue about
the difficulties with mental illness, which can go a very long way in
living a life of normalcy.


I therefore choose to write to educate our family and friends, to allay
this benumbing isolation of mental illness. To be able to talk about the
spiritual attributes of mental illness. Mental illness is only going to
rise in the coming decades. So stay with us. If not like before, be
present in a manner which is comfortable for you. Because deep inside we
are the same people, with the same aspirations, same joys, same fears,
same insecurities, and a need for an ordinary life without stigma and
discrimination, and who knows you may find something relevant to learn
in your lives from the way we cope with ours.
